[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Our next guest is someone
very special to all of us
here at "Beyond Belief."
Dr. Eben Alexander,
a neurosurgeon
who had a remarkable
near-death experience that
not only changed his
life, but changed
the life of so many other
people because he wrote
several bestselling books,
including "Proof of Heaven,"
"The Map of Heaven," and
"Living in a Mindful Universe."
Eben, welcome back
to "Beyond Belief."
>>EBEN ALEXANDER: Well,
George, it's great to be here.
Thanks for having me back on.
>>NOORY: And I am not kidding,
because your experience,
and the way you
came forward with it
was so remarkable and so
persuasive, it, I think,
changed the lives
of a lot of people
who were skeptical
about life after death.
You changed a lot of people.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I think
that's very reassuring.
I was very skeptical
before my NDE.
So having that personal
experience and evidence,
like millions of others
have, helped us to wake
up to a bigger reality.
And I think as a
scientist, I am one
who is fascinated by
consciousness and brain
and mind, this is a very
natural thing for me
to be going through.
And my NDE, when I
look back on my life,
makes perfect sense
that that is what
would happen when I was
54 years old and trying
to find out some deeper
answers about the universe.
And the good news
is a lot of what
I've discovered and in work
with fellow scientists studying
consciousness, is
something that rings
true with many, many souls.
So I think that's
very positive that you
get that kind of feedback
about our interactions.
>>NOORY: Huge.
Let's build up to the
near-death experience.
What happened to you?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I think
it's important to point out
at that time I was a 54-year-old
academic neurosurgeon
and spent more than 15 years
at Harvard Medical School
teaching, thinking I knew
something about brain, mind,
and consciousness.
And then very suddenly.
I was driven deep into coma.
The medical details
of my case are
available to anyone
who cares to look.
They were just
published September 2018
in the "Journal of Nervous
and Mental Diseases."
And that case report
is very important.
It was made by three
independent physicians
who were not part of my care.
And they note the extraordinary
nature of my illness--
that I should have had no robust
conscious experience at all.
I should have had
basically nothing because
of the damage to my neocortex.
That's why my disease is
such a beautiful gift,
because it
obliterates the notion
that the physical brain is
what creates consciousness out
of nothing.
And that's where everybody
misses the point.
That's where the
modern science is going
in a very beautiful direction.
But to cut to the chase,
the experience itself
started in an ugly
underground realm--
the earthworm's eye view.
I was rescued from that by this
slowly spinning white light
with a perfect musical
melody that took me up
into the brilliant ultra-real
gateway valley, that
was very Earth-like
in many ways,
but also had strong
spiritual features.
And all this, of course,
is described in my book,
"Proof of Heaven."
And there was a beautiful
guardian angel on a butterfly
wing in that realm--
in that gateway realm--
who proved extraordinarily
important many months later,
because it was her
identity that helped
me to come to realize
the very realistic nature
and important
aspect of my journey
in terms of my life lessons
and what I was here to learn.
But that gateway valley
was only a stepping stone
to even higher levels that I
visited in my NDE, all the way
out to what I call the core.
The core was infinite
inky blackness,
but filled to overflowing
with this brilliant light.
I called it a dazzling darkness.
It's filled with paradox.
But that's because that's
where all the duality is--
good, bad, black,
white, male, female--
whatever the dualities of this
world come together as one.
And also, that's
where I witnessed
the pure oneness
of consciousness
and the origin of our
very conscious awareness
with that God force--
the creative source
of the whole universe.
And there are other
features of that story that
are important in terms of the
scientific implications that
helped me to realize the
absolute reality of this.
All in the setting when my
doctors had perfect evidence
from my neurologic
exams, CT and MRI scans,
lab values, that this
seven days spent deep
in coma due to a
very rare E. coli
bacterial meningitis,
which almost always happens
in newborns.
Very rare to have E.
coli meningitis in anyone
older than three months.
So yes, I do have to defend
my level of maturity.
But the bottom line is
the whole experience
showed me the brain is not
the producer of consciousness.
When we die, we are actually
liberated to a far higher level
of awareness, as near-death
experiencers have been telling
us for thousands of years.
And so it was an
extraordinary gift.
>>NOORY: How dramatic
did it change your life
when you came out of that coma?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, it's
important to point out
that one of the essential
features of my journey
that seemed very
strange at first,
and it's atypical for a
near-death experience,
is the fact that I was amnesic.
I had absolutely no words,
language, no memories of Earth,
of being human, and
certainly, no knowledge
of Eben Alexander's life.
That's the world
my NDE lived in.
>>NOORY: My gosh.
>>ALEXANDER: Was a
complete empty slate.
And it took me months and
months after I came back
to realize why that
was so important.
Now, that effect
was so powerful,
that when I did come
back to this world on day
seven of my coma, my brain
was an absolute wreck.
I didn't even recognize
loved ones at the bedside--
my mother, my sisters, my son--
>>NOORY: You mean
in reality now?
>>ALEXANDER: In reality, when
I came back to this world,
I had no idea who they were.
And those memories
came back very quickly.
I didn't even have words
or language, as I said.
But words came back
literally within hours.
Much of my language was
completely back within a day.
Childhood memories returned
within a few weeks.
And the shocker, as I discuss
in detail in our third book,
"Living in a Mindful
Universe," is that really
by about two months after
coma all of my memories
had returned.
All of my semantic knowledge of
cosmology, physics, chemistry,
biology, neuroscience.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>ALEXANDER: Everything
had come back.
And a lot of my
personal memories--
and this was gleaned through
conversations with family
and friends that mimic
conversations that had happened
years before my coma--
I realized the memories
were more complete
after I came back--
after they came back by
two months post-coma--
>>NOORY: That's unusual.
>>ALEXANDER: --than
they had been before.
It's not only unusual, it's
completely inexplicable
if you think that memories are
stored in the physical brain.
>>NOORY: Eben, when you shut
down a computer the wrong way,
you could lose memory.
In your particular case, you
shut down in the wrong way,
too.
>>ALEXANDER: I guess you
can call it the wrong way.
>>NOORY: Why didn't it just
wipe out memory totally?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, see,
I think that's part
of the lesson is when I woke up
after this incredible journey
that would be impossible by
our modern neuroscientific
assessment of the
role of the neocortex
in human conscious awareness.
I mean, really it violated
all those principles.
And so initially,
my thinking was,
as I was trying to
figure all this out,
I defaulted to my pre-coma
neurosurgical view of,
well, maybe that's why those
memories were so wrecked
during my coma was
because of this disruption
of the neocortex.
But then you have
to ask how come
they came back so completely,
even more complete than before?
>>NOORY: Or more so.
Yeah.
>>ALEXANDER: And the one
point I will make here
is, as much as people like
to believe that memories are
stored in the brain,
one thing we've
suspected for a long
time in neurosurgery--
and we don't talk about it
much, because everybody is kind
of a physicalist, materialist,
conventional scientist
by training-- but that is
that no matter what we've
done in resecting parts of the
brain over more than 100 years,
there's never been
a case where you had
identifiable swathes
of memory that were
gone with the resected brain.
That's something
else we talk about
in "Living in a
Mindful Universe."
I talk, in particular,
about the work
of Wilder Penfield, one of the
most renowned neurosurgeons
in the 20th century.
He worked in
Canada, in Montreal.
He wrote a beautiful
book in 1975
that summarized his life career
in electrical stimulation
of the brain in awake patients.
I mean, it's the most direct
way of assessing the mind brain
interface.
>>NOORY: That's remarkable.
>>ALEXANDER: And his book,
"Mystery of the Mind," 1975,
makes it very, very clear.
The brain does not
produce consciousness.
It's a filter.
It allows consciousness in.
But Penfield came to
realize that memories--
he thought they were stored
in the neocortex originally,
but then he had plenty of
evidence that's not the case.
And by the end of
the day, it's very
clear to modern
neurosurgeons that memories
don't seem to be stored
in the brain at all.
And I would follow up
with what I've also
come to realize since my coma
is the scientific evidence
for reincarnation is
really undeniable.
If you look at the work
of Dr. Ian Stevenson,
beginning in the 1960s
at the University
of Virginia, Department
of Psychiatry--
and he started the Division
of Perceptual Studies.
And in those five or
six decades of study,
that group of scientists
have identified
more than 2,700 cases
of past life memories
in children where the
best explanation seems
to be of actual reincarnation.
And 35% of those
2,700 cases, the child
actually has a birthmark
that corresponds
with the lethal wound
of a prior injury.
And the reason I
bring all this up
is there's a tremendous
amount of scientific evidence
that memory is not
stored in the brain,
because all of those
reincarnation cases
involve a child with a
new brain growing up.
And obviously, the memories
they have of a past life
are not coming from their brain
that did not experience it.
So memories and
consciousness itself
are not created by
the brain at all,
but the brain serves
as a reducing valve
or filter that allows
primordial consciousness in.
And when we witness
that as a human being,
we tend to think that's
me in there experiencing
that consciousness.
And we have our sensory
systems attached to the body,
and they give you this illusion
of self, and of isolation
and of separation.
But that's where I think the
modern consciousness studies,
including all the reincarnation
work, work on NDEs,
work on non-local consciousness,
like precognition,
remote viewing,
out-of-body experiences--
all of that are showing us that
this world of consciousness
is far bigger than anything
that you can try and explain
with our knowledge of the
physical world as it is.
Even though when you look
at consciousness and all
the experiences
that humans have,
it gives us a beautiful
natural laboratory
to open up into far
grander explanations
of the nature of reality.
The problem is the simple
stuff-- the low-hanging fruit,
which is what materialist
scientists have studied for 400
years of the
scientific revolution--
don't necessarily lead
us in that direction.
But when you actually
study the experiences,
and the relationship
between brain and mind,
that's when you start
opening the door
to a far grander
reality that gives
tremendous power to
individual human beings living
these lives.
>>NOORY: When you talk
about consciousness,
a new Gaia television program
called "Mystery Teachings,"
dives into that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- In quantum physics,
we talk about there
being many simultaneous
possibilities and probabilities
all existing at once.
Until a measurement
or observation, a.k.a.
a choice, is made.
Now, upon observation,
one of those possibilities
will manifest out while
the others will disappear.
This is known as
the observer effect
and collapsing the wave form.
How is this observer
effect discovered?
It relates to another
aspect of complementarity
known as wave particle duality.
In the early days of
quantum discovery,
it began with scientists
trying to understand
the nature of light.
Is it a wave or
is it a particle?
It turns out light
displays both behaviors.
Now, this confronted scientists
with a mystery, or a paradox.
How can might be both
a wave and a particle?
The paradigm at the time said it
must be either/or not both/and.
And the mystery
grew when scientists
began to wonder whether matter
also could behave as both wave
and particle.
And indeed, it could.
There have been many
indications and new discoveries
in quantum physics that
have confirmed all of this.
Now, to make a long story short,
if they set up the experiment
to see if it's a wave,
then indeed, they
get wave-like behavior.
But if they set
up the experiment
to try and observe
it as a particle,
then the behavior changes
to that of a particle.
It's all about how
the scientists choose
to set up their observation
or measurement points.
And what's
fascinating is that it
is as if the quanta are aware
that they're being observed.
The very act of observing
has a dramatic effect
on their behavior.
It is a real phenomenon.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Who and what is
the conscious observer?
What is that?
>>ALEXANDER: That is the
$64 million question.
>>NOORY: It is.
>>ALEXANDER: And
what I would say
is the observer is right
at the core of all of this.
It's the self-awareness.
And of course, all sentient
beings know the observer.
It's--
>>NOORY: Us.
>>ALEXANDER: Yeah, exactly.
But the important
thing to realize
is that that observer is not
your thoughts in your head.
It is not your ego.
It is not your like Eben
Alexander's view of his role,
birth to death in this world.
The observer is far
grander than that.
And it is something that is
actually liberated at the time
that the physical brain
and body come to an end.
Our conscious awareness
expands tremendously
when it's no longer in the
shackles of the physical brain.
So the observer is
absolutely at the core
of understanding all of this.
And that's why in a lot of
the work that I do in my books
and presentations,
I invite people
to develop a much
richer relationship
with that observer, with
that primordial mind.
And again, a lot
of this thinking
comes from the modern evolution
of consciousness studies, which
really suggests that we're
all part of one mind.
And that that one mind
is a consciousness that
is the creative source
of everything that
comes into this universe.
And the way to learn
that more for yourself
and for the individual seeker
is to develop a practice
of meditation, of going within.
I determined this within
two years of my coma.
I knew if I wanted to
understand anything
more about my experience, and
especially about consciousness,
I needed to explore
it far more deeply.
Meditation is the
way to do that.
And it is the way to
demonstrate to ourselves
that our consciousness
is not something
that is created in
the dark recesses
of a three-pound gelatinous mass
floating in a warm, dark bath
inside of our head.
But that, in fact, that
is simply an access point.
The brain allows it to filter.
That allows us to get out
into that primordial mind
and that observer self.
And that's where I think
meditation is so important.
That's why I do all of this
work with Sacred Acoustics
for people who are interested
and want powerful tools
for deep meditation.
I encourage them to go
to sacredacoustics.com
to learn more.
Or also, you can learn a
tremendous amount in our book,
"Living in a Mindful Universe."
But you don't even
have to buy the book.
You can go on my website,
EbenAlexander.com.
There's a free
33-day email course,
called "Your 33 Day Journey into
the Heart of Consciousness."
>>NOORY: Which is a great
course, too, by the way.
>>ALEXANDER: Well
thank you very much
but the thing that I
love about that course
is we have people from all
over the world who've taken it.
More than 6,000 people now.
It has a Translate button, so
it works with all languages.
And people leave their own
comments and experiences.
And I've seen a number
of scientists, engineers,
a lot of people who claim to be
hardcore atheists, who come in
and go through that 33-day
course and go, oh my gosh,
this is so clear.
>>NOORY: It change us.
>>ALEXANDER: It changes you to
realize your spiritual being.
You're not just birth to
death in one incarnation.
But you have many incarnations.
Your higher self is one
connected to all other beings,
to that divine force at
the core of the universe
that NDE'ers have been talking
about for thousands of years.
That is part of each
and every one of us.
Our very conscious awareness
has a direct relationship
with that calls of
force in the universe.
And it binds us all together
through love, and compassion,
and kindness, which
are the oldest
lessons from our
prophets, and mystics,
and our religious systems.
When you get behind the
modern orthodoxies and all,
it's really all based in that
togetherness and that oneness.
And modern consciousness
studies are
proving that from a
scientific viewpoint
this is the way the
universe actually works.
>>NOORY: And how was it
conceived, because it
all seems to fit, doesn't it?
I mean, the brilliancy of the
body, the mind, consciousness,
the soul, it's like a glove.
>>ALEXANDER: It is.
It all fits together.
>>NOORY: How did a
creator come up with this?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
I would say we
are all part of that process.
Consciousness is evolving.
I know we talked
before when I was here
about Teilhard de Chardin,
"The Phenomenon of Man,"
that beautiful book he wrote
in the mid-20th century.
He was a French Jesuit priest.
He happened to be a scientist.
He was a geologist,
paleontologist.
But he came up with a brilliant
concept that took evolution--
and in the mid-20th
century, evolution was--
people thought they
were figuring out
how that worked in a
biological system on Earth.
But he looked at it
in a much bigger way.
And it's because he
knew that consciousness
was much bigger than
just something coming
from a physical brain.
And he realized that, in fact,
this existence of this universe
is all about the evolution
of consciousness.
And just like they say
all politics is local.
Similarly, the evolution
of the universe,
the very reason
for its existence,
is nothing more than the
sum of all sentient beings
in this process of discovery,
of learning, and teaching.
We're all here to
do it together.
That's why this universe exists.
And to me, this
kind of revelation
brings tremendous
meaning and purpose
to each and every one of us.
>>NOORY: It sure does.
>>ALEXANDER: And to
the very existence
of life in this universe.
>>NOORY: What is a soul to
you now at this point, Eben?
>>ALEXANDER: I
think the best way
to define the soul is the soul
is what any individual sentient
being can come to see
is its direct eternal
of infinitely interconnected
aspect of knowing
through experience,
through learning,
through going through
an understanding,
through dealing with
hardships in this life.
I came from my journey
to see that hardships
and difficulties, illness
and injury are actually
the stepping stones
for our growth.
It's what leads us into
remembering the connectedness,
the love of that creative
force, for the creation, which
is basically our
relationship with our very
conscious awareness
and with that
God force at the
core of the universe
that so many have
come to realize.
Not just through
near-death experiences
and other spiritually
transformative experiences.
But cultivating that
through a program
of meditation with a purpose
of trying to learn more
about who am I, why am I
here, where is this all going,
how can I influence the outcome.
And each and every one of
us plays a tremendous role.
In fact, it's one thing that I
try and portray to every soul
that I encounter is
everyone is important.
There is no soul that
is unimportant in this.
And that includes a lot of the
naysayers and the doubters--
>>NOORY: True.
>>ALEXANDER: --because
they actually
present a very important
kind of viewpoint.
And from my point of view,
as I often say in my talks,
the best ally in this
journey of deep discovery
of trying to understand
the nature of consciousness
and existence is a true
open-minded skepticism.
Doubt everything, right
down to ground level.
>>NOORY: But have an open mind.
>>ALEXANDER: But have
a very open mind.
And that is the gift.
And, in fact, I will
tell you in a discussion
of the brain/mind
relationship, which
you can look at as a linear
spectrum, with materialism--
my conventional
view before coma--
physical world is all
that exists, therefore,
the brain must somehow
create consciousness.
That's one end of the spectrum.
Then you've got all
these dualities,
just as Penfield and many
others have observed.
You cannot reduce
mind to brains.
So they say, OK,
there's something
about mind and something
about brain and they coexist.
And you've got all these
dualistic positions
in philosophy.
But at the far end
of the spectrum
is metaphysical or
ontological idealism.
That is, that it's
a mental universe.
And, in fact, that's a
very comfortable idea
for quantum physicists.
For example, I would steer
the scientifically-minded
in your audience
to look at nature.
2005-- Richard Conn Henry, who
is the head of astrophysics
at Johns Hopkins
University-- very--
>>NOORY: Astute.
>>ALEXANDER: --renowned
and astute scientist.
He wrote a one-page essay
on the mental universe where
he made it very clear
that what is emerging
in the world of quantum
physics and in understanding
of it is just as those
founding fathers, like Erwin
Schrodinger, and Wolfgang
Pauli, and Eugene Wigner,
and others said.
Mind is fundamental.
Mind is at the base of it all.
Mind generates matter.
And they were very sure of that,
even with those early quantum
experiments.
And those experiments have only
gotten more and more refined.
But what they are
all trying to tell
us is that mind is fundamental.
We live in a mental universe.
And anybody who questions
mind over matter
and the reality of it, I'd say,
well, look at placebo effect.
The medical profession has
known for more than six decades
that the placebo effect is a
very nice, a powerful standard
to assess it.
>>NOORY: It's real.
>>ALEXANDER: It's very real.
And it assesses new treatments.
Not only medicines,
but also procedures.
There was a recent study
of stenting in the coronary
arteries in Britain that use
a placebo, a sham procedure,
to reveal that what we thought
was so solid-- that is,
coronary stents to
relieve angina--
was all a matter of
mind over matter.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>ALEXANDER: That,
in fact, placebo
was easily as good
as the results
of the procedure itself.
Now, and some people
misinterpret placebo.
They think, oh, you're
just fooling somebody.
You give them a sugar pill.
Tell them they get better.
And they get rid
of their headache.
Well, I would urge you
to look on the Institute
of Noetic Sciences website.
In the mid-1990s, they
assembled more than 3,500 cases
of miraculous healing,
spontaneous regression
of cancers, of advanced
infections, even
of congenital deformities, of
degenerative diseases, where
they showed that a
patient believing
they were doing something
that could make them better
would basically
make them better.
And what I can say about that is
that our modern medical schools
are finally catching
up on all this
and realizing that that
old materialist science--
the chemistry, and the
physics, and the biology that
was taught in medical schools--
and tried to pretend
that it was all just
the interaction of molecules
and nothing more is false.
That, in fact, a tremendous
amount of healing--
I mean, you can demonstrate
all of this as has been done.
The big question in my
mind is how much of what
we see and attribute
to medicines
that move beyond
that placebo effect
is actually just placebo
effect in disguise.
>>NOORY: That's an
interesting thing.
>>ALEXANDER: I mean, we
already know that free will,
power of prayer--
there are many ways to
influence and interact
with this primordial mind
that is the determinant
of our evolving reality.
And that's why
developing a relationship
with that primordial
mind, that God force,
is so important for all of us
for very practical reasons.
And our health is right
at the top of that list.
>>NOORY: It sure is.
Psychic medium James
Van Praagh, of course,
has talked about the
power of the soul.
Truly remarkable.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- The number one overall lesson,
whether positive or negative,
is love.
Number one, we have to
learn to love ourselves,
to really embrace ourselves,
to honor ourselves,
and to forgive ourselves.
Very difficult sometimes.
But how can you
love another person
if you don't love
yourself first?
So we must learn the
various aspects of love
and loving those
parts of ourselves
which perhaps we perceive
as negative or not full.
We have to love every
aspect of ourselves
and then we're able
to love somebody else.
Love is an incredible energy.
Love is the number one energy,
the vibration of the universe.
And that is really what we
want to align ourselves toward.
We are all trying
to bring us back
to that oneness-- that oneness
of love is what we all are.
And so we come back
in these lifetimes--
this all comes back from
lifetime to lifetime,
from experience to
experience, from one world
to another world, to experience
the various aspects of love
and to share that aspect of
love with everybody else.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: He seems
to be saying, Eben,
that if you care
about yourself, you're
going to be able to
cure yourself on things.
>>ALEXANDER: That's very much--
very real.
I mean, I love this--
I know I've said in my
book, "Proof of Heaven,"
I said the deepest scientific
truth of my journey
was the discovery of the power
of the binding force of love.
And how we're all bound--
>>NOORY: So true.
>>ALEXANDER: --together
through that.
And really the best way
to manifest love for self
is to serve as a
conduit, to allow
that love to flow
through, and love others.
Kindness, compassion,
forgiveness
when necessary,
gratitude for all
those beautiful relationships
we have with people.
And that includes the
tough relationships,
because they are often
there to serve, again,
just like hardships,
like illness, and injury,
the tough
relationships are there
to help guide us, to learn more.
And the more we can live our
lives with love in our heart,
love for self, love for
others, the more this world
will change.
One of the profound lessons
of my near-death experience
was coming to see that those
hardships and difficulties
truly are the pathway
towards becoming
more of who we are here to
be, and that love is really
the key.
And of course, the empirical
data for the power of love
comes from near-death
experiences, which
are independent of
your religious beliefs,
of your cultural beliefs.
They have a commonality of
the binding force of love
going back thousands of
years across all continents.
And the more scientists
study near-death experiences,
the more they come to realize
that a very deep lesson
about the nature of reality
is that that love is
the most important thing.
In fact, for me, it became
very clear after my coma
that this is not a battle
between good and evil.
The forces of darkness
maybe being powerful enough
to someday overwhelm the
forces of light and love.
Because that apparent darkness,
the apparent evil in our world,
is really the absence
of the light and love.
>>NOORY: Well, when
you talk about evil,
I think back at the horrendous
things that Hitler did
or Joseph Stalin for the
Soviet Union at the time.
How does the planet--
how does the universe
compensate for people like that?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, I think
that's a complicated question
in many ways.
But in some ways,
it's also simple.
If you use the analogy of look
at the world of, say, addiction
and alcoholism, we
often talk about what's
called a gift of desperation.
And it's because
when you're wrestling
with these kinds of issues, you
circle the drain and head down,
and sooner or later you
realize that you're either
going to have to come to some
truth with yourself about
things and start learning the
lessons the universe is trying
to give you or you're
going to come to an end.
And unfortunately, in alcoholism
and addiction, in many cases
in our modern
world, which I think
is so seduced by the
false sense of separation
of scientific
materialism that we
start believing that business
of our ego and the demands
that our ego makes on us.
And that includes
massive consumerism,
economic polarization,
things like that that
are very toxic, very damaging.
Because it really is about
more realizing that oneness,
and that connectedness, and that
it's what we do for ourselves
and others that gives to
the higher good that I think
can really take us in
a beautiful direction.
I came to realize that
unconditional love has
infinite power to heal.
And to me, that was one
of the biggest indicators
of how all this is
working out with evil, why
there can be so much evil.
Because no one doubts the
tremendous amount of darkness
and evil in our
world, even though
I believe that it's
improving rapidly.
I believe the awakening that
many of us in consciousness
studies talk about from
a scientific viewpoint is
inevitable, in one
sense, but also,
absolutely crucial if we
are to survive as a species.
This is something
we talk about a lot
in "Living in a
Mindful Universe."
I think it's the reason
this awakening is happening.
So in essence, these
kinds of challenges,
this apparent darkness
and evil that we
see of humans
against other humans,
is really that gift
of desperation.
And we can come to our senses
and wake up to the reality
of this, because the status quo,
especially with any apparent
overwhelming nature of that
selfishness, and greediness,
and the economic polarization,
the damage to the climate from
the material excesses,
fossil fuel addiction--
what have you--
is all something that can
come into a much finer balance
when we recover this oneness
of connection, binding
force of love, and realize
that we're really all here
to help each other.
>>NOORY: Where does
prayer fit into this?
>>ALEXANDER: Well, from my point
of view, prayer and meditation
in many ways are the same thing.
And certainly, the
way I use meditation.
I use sacred acoustics
to get into very
deep transcendental states
of awareness, which to me are
a form of centering prayer.
And centering prayer is really
a form of silent prayer.
It's not going in and
asking for things, other
than that thy will, that
the higher good be served.
And especially, when you
start to realize how important
it is to get the bigger
picture of your existence
through an acknowledgment
of reincarnation.
That you've been here
many times before.
That you're in a progressive
growth phase of learning that
involves other future lifetimes.
That your relationships
with people in this lifetime
are simply reshuffling
of relationships
with similar souls
in prior lifetimes,
and that you're all
working together
toward something bigger
in future lifetimes,
gives us an ability
to see that prayer,
opening up to this oneness
of that creative force
of the universe, that
God force, coming
to realize our alignment
with that force,
having love in our hearts,
love and compassion,
kindness for self and others.
And that is something that
can be easily involved
in a prayerful state
of seeking the highest
and best good for all involved.
I see many examples
of how prayer
has been very powerful
in people's lives to help
give them the outcome needed.
That doesn't always mean
you get physical healing.
Although, in so
many cases it does.
And we've already talked
about mind over matter,
in general, and the
placebo effect and all
of those spontaneous remissions.
But I would say the
biggest example of that
is in near-death experiences.
For example, that
case report that I
talked about a little
while ago of my case.
Those physicians remarked
on not only the surprise
that I would have any
conscious experience at all,
but they even go so
far as to surmise
that one of the
reasons that I had
such a remarkable
recovery-- and no doctor who
looks at my medical
records and looks
at how I've come out of it all,
would doubt that it's really
a miracle, it has no explanation
within Western medicine--
but you actually find
that kind of healing all
through the NDE literature.
For example, Mary C. Neal,
the orthopedic surgeon who had
a near-death experience
kayaking in Chile--
late 1990s.
Her kayak went under water more
than 10 feet, broke her legs,
buried her under
water for 30 minutes.
>>NOORY: She couldn't get
out of the kayak, right?
>>ALEXANDER: Yeah, she was stuck
with broken legs in the kayak,
more than 30
minutes under water.
You don't come back from that.
>>NOORY: No.
Nobody does.
>>ALEXANDER: But she
did because of the power
of the spiritual
nature of an NDE,
which is the same as
the power of prayer,
it helped her to come back.
And I think, similarly, in
the case of Anita Moorjani.
She wrote the book
"Dying to Be Me."
And she had a very advanced
lymphoma back in February 2006.
Taken into a hospital room, in
emergency room in Hong Kong.
Any doctor on Earth would
look at her medical facts
at that moment, say she'll
be dead within eight hours,
no doubt.
Well, she's not.
She lived through it.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>ALEXANDER: She had an
NDE in which she realized
that if she chose to
come back to this world,
her cancer would disappear.
Which it did.
We're learning more and more the
power of the nature of spirit,
the power of prayer, how we
all have a connection with this
creative force of the universe--
the God force or whatever you
want to call it--
the very base of our
conscious awareness.
And this is how this world
can wake up and become
a far grander, kinder,
more together world.
This is the world that
we came here to create.
>>NOORY: I agree.
Eben, Larry Dossey
of "Healing Words"
talks about the power of prayer
on Gaia's "Inspirations."
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I mean, am I denying
my patients something
that might be helpful?
- Ah, so are you the block?
- And I got really
concerned about that.
The way of resolving
that crisis for me
was to look at the
world's literature trying
to find other studies
that had to do with this.
I thought I might uncover
two or three extra ones
that I hadn't heard about.
I came up with a 130.
And 2/3 of them show that there
is a positive effect from this.
I began to think this
is the best kept secret
in modern medicine.
And so I began to adapt
prayer for all my patients.
And that's how the book
got published, by the way,
and written.
Looking at the data--
not just stories,
not just anecdotes--
but combining the scientific
research with the stories
and that's how "Healing
Words" came to be.
- And did you pray at the
bedside of these patients?
- I invented my own
private prayer ritual.
I would go into my office
early in the morning-- earlier
than usual.
Close my door and have my
own private prayer ritual
that I invented.
And--
- Which was?
- Oh, well, you
really want to know?
- I do.
Yes.
- Well, over the
years, my patients
knew I was interested in
the anthropology of healing.
And so they had
given me as gifts
very shamanic rattles and
various herbal incenses
from around the world.
- Interesting.
- And so I concocted
my own ritual
where I would burn incense that
shamans and healers were using
around the world,
and shake my rattles,
and say my healing request
and prayers for my patients
that I would be seeing on
hospital rounds that morning
and who would be coming
to my office that day.
And I continued
this ritual until I
retired from the practice
of internal medicine.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: It does
work, doesn't it?
>>ALEXANDER: It has
tremendous power.
And along those
lines, I would also
highly recommend Dr. Larry
Dossey's book, the "One Mind."
Because he is an identical
twin, and as many people who
are twins realize telepathy
is absolutely real.
So he started to investigate
the notion of the connectedness
of telepathy that's
represented through twins,
but then expanding
it tremendously
into the animal world.
And I won't get into
all of it, but it's
a wonderful book about the
nature of consciousness.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>ALEXANDER: But it really
points at the same thing--
the power of prayer,
the connectedness
with the conscious
element of the universe.
It's really just
showing us that there
are top-down organizational
principles in this world that
completely help us explain
how all this works.
That are not the same as
the bottom-up assumptions
of modern--
the conventional science that
I studied before my coma, which
tries to pretend that all
the events in human lives
are nothing more than electrons,
protons, atoms, molecules.
All of it just following natural
laws of physics, chemistry,
biology.
And that it's all kind of
predictable at the outset,
and the consciousness emerges
from those physical processes.
That's why in modern
consciousness studies,
we realize that's
completely backwards.
And Dr. Larry Dossey, I think,
is way ahead of the curve,
as he has been for decades in
showing the power of prayer,
that it's very real, that
we're spiritual beings, living
in a spiritual universe,
and that quantum physics
is one of the most profound
kind of proofs of that.
But it also shows us
that this world around us
is not exactly as it appears.
And that's where it gets
very, very interesting.
But all of it starts pointing
to the primacy of consciousness
and the power of our free will.
Because materialist
science, like
I worshiped it before my coma--
and I don't use
that term lightly--
would have very proudly told
you that you have no such thing
as free will at all.
I believe the universe
exists for sentient beings
to manifest free will.
That's what that whole evolution
of consciousness is all about.
So before my coma, like most
of conventional science,
we had it completely backwards.
>>NOORY: Had you not had your
near-death experience, Eben,
would you be where you are
right now in terms of knowledge?
>>ALEXANDER: It would've
taken me a little longer,
but I would have paid
attention to these arguments.
The logic, the evidence,
the rational argument
supporting the primacy
of consciousness,
that we are eternal spiritual
beings in a spiritual universe,
is overwhelming.
>>NOORY: It's huge.
>>ALEXANDER: In
fact, what you find
is most of those people
who claim to be skeptics
are really pseudo-skeptics.
They don't even
read the literature,
because they've made up their
mind that it's impossible
based on their
theoretical frameworks.
But their theoretical frameworks
go nowhere on the issue
of consciousness itself.
If some materialist
scientist tells you,
yes, the brain
creates consciousness.
Well, yes, play along.
Say yes, well, tell me more.
You won't get a thing.
There's nothing there.
Consciousness is
fundamental and primary.
And that's why we
have free will.
We have power over our destiny.
We have tremendous power
over our very health.
And that is the most
beautiful lesson
coming from modern
consciousness studies.
And I think it's part of
that awakening, that world
revolution that, in fact, is
essential if we are to survive.
>>NOORY: Do you think
precognition, telepathy,
consciousness--
this is all tied together?
>>ALEXANDER: It's
all tied together.
In fact, it's one
of the big problems
is so much of our culture
is based in this the world
of the expert.
Let's get the expert in.
Well, it turns out that the
only experts on consciousness
are people who
study consciousness.
Studying the brain does not make
you an expert in consciousness.
>>NOORY: Or who have gone
through things like you have.
>>ALEXANDER: Well, that is true.
Or people who have
explored consciousness
and get to know so
much more about it.
But I think that's such
a crucial part of this.
But the experts are
coming into alignment now.
For example, back in
November, Karen and I
were in London for the opening
of the Galileo Commission.
I would advise all of
your viewers to check out
GalileoCommission.org.
And more than 100
scientific advisors--
I'm one of them, but there
are many around the world who
study consciousness--
and they put out
this beautiful commission
report that makes it very clear
that our conventional science
of materialism is dead.
It actually died
about 80 years ago.
And this paper is a very
important clarion call
to this world to wake up to
the fundamental existence
of consciousness and the power
of our free will over all
of our evolving future.
And that we have an important
responsibility in every choice
we make in our
lives to honor that.
And that, I think, is probably
one of the biggest lessons.
Because the materialist science
that I worshipped before that
would say you have
no free will, they
say that because
they believe it's
just the substance, the
brain, the electrons, atoms,
molecules, following the laws
of physics, chemistry, biology.
So if it's all just chemical
reactions and electron fluxes,
where do you insert
any kind of free will?
And that's where the observer
effect, the lessons of quantum
physics, modern
consciousness studies
open the door to a far grander
reality about who we are
and this awakening and the
nature of consciousness itself.
>>NOORY: Eben, spiritual
leader Dr. Gary Zukav talks
about the power of choice.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- The only thing that stands
between you and the life
that you want of love,
and fulfillment, and joy,
and appreciation, and
gratitude, and contentment,
and humbleness, and
clarity, and forgiveness,
and love are matters of choice--
your choice.
And you will see how
powerful your choice
is when you realize
that you will never
be judged by the universe
for whatever choice you make,
because there's learning
in every choice.
So why choose violence?
Why choose fear and doubt, when
you can choose love and trust?
You're on a quest
for authentic power
and nothing can
prevent that quest.
Your only choice is the
nature of the experiences
that you will have
on that quest now.
And those depend
on your choices.
This is more than a moral talk.
This is a talk about evolution.
Because as you make
those choices--
choices of love
instead of fear--
you not only assist in the
maturation of your personality,
you not only become
capable of giving the gifts
that you were born to give,
you also assist your soul
in its evolution.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: And you write
about the power of choice
in your latest book.
>>ALEXANDER: We do.
And I think it's very important.
And Gary Zukav is a
good friend, and I
have been very pleased with
his work, in great agreement.
I think he shows
us something very
deep about that power
of choice and how
we are truly responsible.
And I think what
near-death experiences
would supplement
that notion with is
it's not just our actions.
Because when you go through
a life review, which
has been very commonly described
in near-death experiences going
back at least 2,400 years
to the time of Plato,
what you realize
in the life review
is that even your
thoughts have an impact.
That's why it's
so important to--
>>NOORY: You're right.
>>ALEXANDER: --be
mindful of what
we're thinking, and our
thoughts and our emotions.
Because the life review shows
very clearly, as so many
describe it, that you
experience it not as yourself.
You experience it
as those around you
who were impacted by your
thoughts and actions.
It's a beautiful
example of showing us
that we are not our little
self and our little ego,
but that, in fact, we
are part of that far
grander consciousness.
And this is all about the
dream of that primordial mind.
It is working through all
this in a very active fashion.
But each and every one of us
is learning in that process
through our relationships with
others and acknowledging--
because in the life review, any
pain or suffering that you've
handed out to others,
you will feel,
you will have the
emotional impact.
>>NOORY: It comes
back, doesn't it?
>>ALEXANDER: You talked a
little while ago about Hitler.
I would not envy
that life review.
More than 53 million deaths.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>ALEXANDER: Not to
mention all those
impacted by the actions
of him with that war.
His life review
would be incredible.
What a learning experience.
But he had to experience every
bit of that pain and suffering.
We reap what we sow.
>>NOORY: Do you think he has
reincarnated and is getting
better or do you think he has
been put in fire and brimstone?
>>ALEXANDER: No, I--
first of all, it's
important to point
out that Earth time is
part of the stage setting.
So in other words, when you say,
has he already reincarnated,
it's a question that really
doesn't have much meaning
when you consider that there
is a temporal flow, that I call
deep time, in the
spiritual realm that
is much more of an alignment
of our lessons learned
and our journeys.
And so, by definition,
nobody ever
reincarnates before they
had to be present there
for all loved ones
and others who were
crossing over-- what have you.
There is a deeper
ordering of causality.
So all I can say is that
Hitler's life review would not
be anything that I think Hitler
would want to go through,
but he chose that for his
own pathway, his higher soul.
And I'm not one to
sit here and define
how we can explain
all the depths
of evil and apparent darkness
we've seen in this world.
But I do believe that they all
are there for a purpose to help
to guide us towards that
oneness, towards love,
just as near-death
experiencers--
people who have been to that
other side and then come back
to this world to talk about it--
share the importance of that.
When we see the
good side of humans
in dealing with hardships,
whether it's a natural disaster
or human on human conflict, we
see beautiful examples of love,
of unconditional love,
being the overwhelming force
in the equation.
And I would say
that that is really
the deepest lesson of all this.
And as much as people--
it can become
overwhelming if you
dwell on the darkness and evil.
But if you can rise
above it a bit--
and this is why I often repeat
those words that I first said
when I came out of coma--
I don't remember
saying these words,
but everybody at
the bedside told me
I said it over and over again--
all is well.
All is well.
And what that really means
is when you meditate,
go into this, develop this
relationship with higher soul,
you start to get the big
broad overall view that
incorporates all of it, and
can see a win-win situation.
I came to see that some
people who before my coma
I looked at as my nemesis,
as an enemy, someone who
is preventing me from
getting things in my life
that I wanted, in fact,
was a near and dear soul
mate who was helping me
to learn a tough lesson.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ALEXANDER: We're
all in this together.
>>NOORY: That's dramatic.
>>ALEXANDER: So always try to
take that bigger, higher view
where you can see how love
really connects us all.
And even those who seem to be
bringing badness into our lives
or into the world, in some ways
are helping us to examine more
deeply and come up with
something that makes
more sense about connectedness,
and purpose, and growth
towards this oneness, towards
what Teilhard de Chardin was
discussing.
And that's where
this is all headed.
>>NOORY: Would I
have liked you before
your near-death experience?
>>ALEXANDER: I don't know.
>>NOORY: What do you think?
>>ALEXANDER: I think.
I mean--
>>NOORY: Did you like you?
>>ALEXANDER: Yeah, I did.
I liked me, but I had a
lot of growing up to do.
I mean, especially, I would
say as I evolved beyond my NDE,
and took on this much
broader view of self,
and my role in my life,
and started doing past life
regressions, and getting
some kind of idea
of the context in which I might
actually be an eternal spirit.
It's always a case
of all is well.
I think the key is you need to
be able to realize that bigger
picture and how all this has
a positive direction in it.
When we talk about
reincarnation,
it's not the blind
mechanistic wheel
of some religious systems.
It's very much goal-directed.
And it's towards
that sense of love,
and of prosperity
for all, and of true
brotherhood and sisterhood.
And not only that, but
realizing that this is not
just about humans at all.
It's about all life
throughout the cosmos.
It's a much bigger
deal than we currently
can discern from our limited
materialistic four-dimensional
space time view.
But that's why
exploring consciousness
and developing a much richer
relationship with our higher
soul, with that
primordial mind, is
so crucial in our
personal growth,
and also in the evolution of
all of life in the universe,
and certainly, of humanity's
coming into its own
in the current era.
>>NOORY: Are you
afraid of dying?
>>ALEXANDER: Not at all.
Dying is an adventure.
It is a release from--
>>NOORY: No rush.
>>ALEXANDER: --the shackles.
I'm in no rush now.
I believe I still have much
work to do in this world.
I believe--
>>NOORY: Me too.
>>ALEXANDER: --for one
thing I can't remotely claim
to have a perfect
understanding of this primacy
of consciousness,
the primordial mind
hypotheses that we explore in
"Living in a Mindful Universe,"
but I certainly can see the
direction in which it's headed.
And for me that direction
absolutely depends on science,
because science is the way
that we share information
and we come to what's
known as consilience.
Consilience is basically
a statement that,
when you examine a
certain profound problem
from very different
directions, if they all
start converging on the
same thing, that is what
we should discern as truth.
And just to cut to
the chase, I would
like to say in this discussion
consilience synthesizes two
of most profound mysteries
to modern science.
One is the measurement
paradox, observer effect,
what's known as contextually
in quantum physics.
And the other is the
mind/brain connection as
examined through neuroscience
and philosophy of mind.
And it turns out that
a fascinating example
of consilience is how
both of those very
broad, deep examinations
of the nature of reality
by very intelligent
insightful people
are all leading to the same
conclusion of the primacy
of mind and the power
we have to manifest
the world of our dreams.
>>NOORY: It is
amazing how it works.
It seems complex, but it's
very simple, isn't it?
>>ALEXANDER: It is.
It is absolutely
beautifully simple.
When you can summarize it
in the phrase "all is well"
and fully understand
what that means,
come to realize that
things like life reviews
just show us that
the golden rule--
do unto others as you would
have done unto yourself--
is written into the very
fabric of the universe.
And as we come to acknowledge
these deep and profound lessons
in a scientific sense,
the spiritual nature
of our very being
and of this universe,
we will grow tremendously.
>>NOORY: I want you to
assume for a moment, Eben,
that you are standing
at the deathbed of one
of your patients.
The time has come.
What do you tell them now?
>>ALEXANDER: What I tell
them is that what they
are about to witness is
the most beautiful example
of the connectedness of
souls throughout the cosmos,
of connectedness with the
very prime creative force
of this universe, and that
they will find greater love
and comfort than
they've ever witnessed
in this four-dimensional
incarnation, unless, of course,
they developed a very active
practice of going within.
Because you can certainly
come to see this,
know this, through being
open-minded, and living
these lives, and seeing the
love, the power of forgiveness
and acceptance and mercy on
all fellow beings beginning
with that soul
that you know best.
This is all about coming into
greater discovery of that.
The one thing I would
assure them of--
and I'm most assuring of this--
is that when you die,
your conscious awareness
becomes far grander.
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
Why don't we teach
this in school?
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
I mean, that's
what we're trying to do is
bring this reality to the world.
Luckily, what I see in this
world in the last decade
is a tremendous amount of
growth along these lines.
I cannot tell you how many
scientists, engineers,
modern scientifically-educated
people contact me and are very
grateful for the big view that
this kind of thinking brings
them.
And it really is
all about all of us
coming to greater
knowing of self
and of others and of these
very deep principles.
It's wisdom that's been in this
world for thousands of years.
Go back to Vedic texts.
Go back to eastern and
western spiritual origins,
the original
teachings of prophets.
I mean, so many of them glimpsed
this, knew this, felt this,
were co-creating
it even back then.
So in so many ways, it's
not like this is big news.
But it really is--
I would say it's the
culmination of the 400
years of the scientific
revolution trying
to make sense of this
world in a way that
goes beyond personal
experience and just what
an individual could discern
from their own life experience.
But we really need
to know what's
the bigger human experience.
What can we all truly share
about the nature of reality?
And that's why I think this
kind of awakening is so crucial.
Now, of course, it
also, as I said earlier,
it's part of that
gift of desperation,
because the status quo,
the economic polarization--
the wealth is far, far,
far too concentrated
in a tiny pocket in this
country and around this world.
we really need to have a far
grander vision of sharing
and of taking care
of each other,
taking care of the least,
the last, and the lost,
realizing we're all
in this together.
And that the only
thing that is important
really is our soul journey.
And in the soul journey, as
any near-death experiencer
will tell you, you never
go through it and think,
well, I should have had
a Porsche or a yacht.
That would have made
my life more complete.
No.
It's about the relationships.
It's about the love.
It's about the power that
comes from helping others.
And realizing that
that's the best
way to essentially
concentrate focus
and resonate with
this beautiful love
that the creator
has of the creation,
that we can each come to
know in our own existence
simply through
opening our minds,
feeling the emotional power
of all this, and yet, also,
developing that relationship
with our higher soul, which
is one of connectedness
and purpose.
>>NOORY: Eben, thank you.
Not only for being on "Beyond
Belief," but for sharing
truly a remarkable
story of your life.
I appreciate it.
>>ALEXANDER: Well,
thank you, George.
It's always a pleasure to
talk with you and thanks
so much for having me back.
>>NOORY: Dr. Eben Alexander,
our remarkable guest here
on "Beyond Belief."
If you've ever doubted the
possibility of the existence
of the other side,
don't doubt it any more
when you listen to him.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]